NEW
Deletes the program in memory, clears all variables, releases all
string and array space.  Example:   NEW

RUN [<line descriptor>]
If the line descriptor is included, starts execution of the BASIC
program at the line specified.  If the line descriptor is omitted,
execution begins at the first line in memory.  In either case, a
CLEAR is automatically executed first.
Examples:   RUN		RUN COMD	RUN SUBROUTINE+1

* SYMBOL
Types a table of variable names, line descriptors, their types and
their locations.  Example:	SYMBOL


* EDIT <line descriptor>
Causes the interpreter to enter the edit mode on the line described.  The 
line will be printed.  Once in edit mode, single letter commands of
the form nXs are used, where n is the iteration constant (1 if ommitted),
X is the command (detailed below), and s is the search string (if required).
Note that if it is desired to use a command without the search string,
a carriage-return should be entered immediately after the command letter.

Commands:

 U   Prints the line up to the present pointer position.
nD   Deletes n characters starting with the present pointer position.
 K   Kills (deletes) a whole line, then enters insert mode. (MUST insert!)
 N   Inserts the current edit buffer as a new line.
 W   Deletes (Wipes out) the line being edited.
nSs  Moves the pointer to the n'th occurance of string s.
 Is  Performs command S first, then inserts characters at the 
     pointer position until a carriage return is entered.
nCs  Changes the nth occurance of string following C to the
     string inserted from keyboard.
 Q   Returns to command level.
 P   Prints the line in the edit line buffer.
 A   Appends characters to the end of the line until a carriage
     return is entered.
nL   Lists n lines starting with the present line, and enters edit
     mode on the last line listed.
 T   Type the rest of the line past the pointer, then the line up
     to the pointer.
 R   Replace the edited line in source with the current edit buffer,
     and print out new line.   ***** IMPORTANT NOTE *****
     Until this command is executed, the source line is not changed.
nF   Move forward n lines and enter edit mode there.
nB   Move backward n lines and enter edit mode there.
 Ms  Move to (line descriptor) and enter edit mode there (search
     string s is used for line descriptor).
nX   Move pointer back n characters.
n<space>   Move pointer forward n characters.

The rubout key functions on insert/change commands as a delete key.
A rubout during command entry will cause the command to be aborted.
Commands are not echoed -- this makes it much easier to see what you
are editing--if in doubt about what you typed, use the P command.
Don't use the C or I commands at the end of a line if they cause the
line to be longer.
















				2-2






