
Line Editor
-----------

EDLIN is a simple line-oriented screen editor.

It uses the same commands as the editor in 'Starting Forth' and
is a slightly modified version of the editor that appeared in
Forth Dimensions III/3.

Editing of screens with a line editor is rather tedious and is
best avoided (see EDITOR.SCR for a full-screen editor).  However
it does have the advantage that it does not need to be installed
and works with any video terminal.

To make EDLIN the default screen editor rename EDLIN.SCR to
EDITOR.SCR


General screen commands:
------------------------

 EDIT  ( blk# | -- )

     Enter the EDITOR vocabulary and select screen blk# for
     editing.  If blk# is not specified then select the screen
     and cursor postion where the last error occured.  All
     editor commands (see below) are available for use.

 L  ( -- )          List

     Lists the current screen.  The screen number is obtained
     from the variable SCR and is set by LIST, EDIT or when a
     LOAD error occurs.

 N  ( -- )          Next 

     Increments the screen number by one.  Typically used
     immediately before the L command.

 B  ( -- )          Back

     Decrements the screen number by one.  Typically used
     immediately before the L command.



Editor commands:
----------------

These commands are available only from the EDITOR vocabulary (e.g.
after executing EDIT)

For commands that allow it, text input is optional.  If no text
follows the command then the current contents of  either the FIND
or INSERT buffer (according to the command) will be used instead.


 ?  ( -- )

     Display the current line and cursor position.

 ^  ( -- )

     Used as terminator for all commands allowing text input.
     Allows more than one command to be used on a line.

 T  ( ln# -- )      Type

     Type line ln# from the current screen and select it as the
     current line.

 P ( "text" -- )    Put

     Copies any following text into the INSERT buffer and the
     string is put into the current line replacing its previous
     contents.  If P is followed by two or more blanks then the
     entire line will be erased.

 X  ( -- )          Extract

     Copies the current line into the INSERT buffer and then
     extracts it from the block.  All following lines are moved
     up.

 TILL ( "text" -- )

     Copies any following text into the FIND buffer and deletes
     all characters from the current cursor position up till and
     including the string.

 I ( "text" -- )    Insert

     Copies any following text into the INSERT buffer and inserts
     the string just behind the cursor.  Any text pushed off the
     end of the line will be lost.

 F ( "text" -- )    Find

     Copies any following text into the FIND buffer and finds the
     string in the remainder of the block.  The F command with no
     following text behaves as the N command.

 E  ( -- )          Erase

     Erases backwards from the cursor as many characters as are
     currently in the FIND buffer.  To be used after the F
     command.

 D ( "text" -- )    Delete

     Copies any following text into the FIND buffer then finds
     the next occurrence of the string within the line and
     deletes it.  The D command is a combination of the F and E
     commands.

 R ( "text" -- )    Replace

     Copies any following text into the INSERT buffer.  Combines
     the E and I commands to replace a found string with a given
     string or the contents of the INSERT buffer.

 U ( "text" -- )    Under

     Copies any following text into the INSERT buffer and puts
     the string into the line under the current line.  All
     following lines are pushed down and the last line is lost.

 S ( blk# | "text" -- )  Search

     Copies any following text into the FIND buffer then searches
     from the top of current block to the end of screen blk#-1 for
     the string, displaying the lines and location where a match
     occurs.  If blk# is not given then #SCREENS is assumed.

 M  ( blk# ln# -- )  Move

     Copies the current line into the INSERT buffer and moves a
     copy of the INSERT buffer into the line UNDER line ln# of
     screen blk#.  The current line is incremented by one.  This
     allows sequential lines to be moved with a minimum of
     keystrokes.

 WIPE  ( -- )

     Wipe the current screen by setting its contents to blanks.

