
                Text File Editor for DX-FORTH
                -----------------------------

TED is a resident text file editor.


1. INSTALLATION

Users who prefer working with text files can replace the
resident screen file editor in DX-Forth with TED.  To do this
enter the following from the DOS command prompt:

  A:FORTH-F - SYSTEM INCLUDE TED AKA TED EDIT SAVE DX BYE

For CP/M only:

DX-FORTH for CP/M must be configured for your terminal before
using the text file editor.  See DX-FORTH.TXT for further
details.


2. INVOKING

The text editor is invoked by typing TED.  If the editor is
not resident it is automatically loaded from disk file TED.F

If you mainly use text files you may wish to make EDIT a
synonym for TED as described in the previously section.

To load and edit the text file "filename":

  TED ( "filename[.F]" -- )

If no filename is given, the file and line number as specified
by LASTFILE and LOADLINE will be used.  These typically hold
the filename and position where the last compile error occured.

Note: Specifying a filename with TED will not be available
until TED has been invoked for the first time.

A "load/size error" will be reported if the specified file
cannot be found, is write-protected, or too large to fit in
memory.

Edits are confined to memory and only written to disk on
exit with ^U (S)ave or when writing to another filename with
^Z (W)rite.

Lines can be up to 132 characters but only the leftmost are
displayed and directly editable.  Tabs are converted to
single spaces on loading.  Trailing blanks are automatically
removed as each line is edited.


3. STANDALONE EXECUTABLE

TED may be compiled as a standalone command-line executable.
To do this rename TED.F to TEDS.F and change the line:

        0 \ true for turnkey
to
        1 \ true for turnkey

Then compile using:

	FORTH - INCLUDE TEDS BYE

The standalone version includes a help screen and takes an
optional filename from the command-line as the input file.


4. EDITOR COMMANDS

Cursor movement:

Ctrl-E   Move cursor up
Ctrl-X   Move cursor down
Ctrl-D   Move cursor right
Ctrl-S   Move cursor left
Ctrl-I   Move cursor to the next tab stop (TAB)
Ctrl-Q   Move cursor home

Editing:

Ctrl-G   Delete character to the right of the cursor
Ctrl-H   Delete character to the left of the cursor
Ctrl-T   Erase all characters to the right of the cursor
Ctrl-Y   Delete the current line. Lines below cursor are moved
         up one position.
Ctrl-M   Insert a blank line at the cursor position

Miscellaneous:

Ctrl-C   Move to the next page
Ctrl-R   Move to the previous page
Ctrl-L   Restore the current line
Ctrl-U   Exit the editor
Ctrl-Z   Multi-function command
         C - clear the text buffer
         H - show help screen (if present)
         R - read file from disk
         W - write file to disk

